---
layout: post
title: 读《Sapiens：A Brief History of Humankind》
category: 读后感
---
这是2019年读的第009本书，Yuval Noah Harari 著，累计用时18小时+

>A second theory agrees that our unique language evolved as a means of sharing information about the world. But the most important information that needed to be conveyed was about humans, not about lions and bison.  Our language involved as a way of gossiping. According to this theory, Homo sapiens is primarily social animal. Social cooperation is our key for survival and reproduction. It is not enough for individual men and women to know the whereabouts of lions and bison. It's much more important for them to know who in their band hates whom. who is sleeping with whom,  who is honest, and who is a cheat.

>Ants and bees can also work together in huge numbers, but they do so in a very rigid manner and only with close relatives. Wolfs and chimpanzees cooperate far more flexibly than ants, but they can do so only with small numbers of other individuals that they know intimately. Sapiens can cooperate in extremely flexible ways with countless numbers of strangers. That's why Sapiens rule the world, whereas ants eat our leftovers and chimps are locked up in zoos and research laboratories.

>While people in today's affluent societies work an average of forty to forty-five hours a week, and people in the developing world work sixty and even eighty hours a week, hunter-gatherers living today in the most inhospitable of habitats - such as the Kalahari Desert - work on average for just thirty-five to forty-five hours a week. They hunt only one day out of three, and gathering takes up just three to six hours daily. In normal times, this is enough to feed the band. It may well be that ancient hunter-gatherers living in zones more fertile than the Kalahari is spent even less time obtaining food and raw materials. On top of that, foragers enjoyed a lighter load of household chores. They had no dishes to wash, no carpets to vacuum, no floors to polish, no nappies to change and no bills to pay.

>In the Pacific Ocean, the main wave of extinction began in about 1500 BC, when Polynesian farmers settled the Solomon Islands, Fiji and New Caledonia. They killed off, directly or indirectly, hundreds of species of birds, insects, snails and other local inhabitants. From there, the wave of extinction moved gradually to the east, the south and the north, into the heart of the Pacific Ocean, obliterating on its way the unique fauna of Samoa and Tonga (1200 BC); the Marquis Island (AD 1); Easter Island, the Cook Islands and Hawaii (AD 500); and finally  New Zealand (AD 1200).

>Don't believe tree-huggers who claim that our ancestors lived in harmony with nature. Long before the Industrial Revolution, Homo sapiens held the record among all organisms for driving the most plant and animal species to their extinctions. We have the dubious distinction of being the deadliest species in the annals of biology.

>The Agricultural Revolution certainly enlarged the sum total of food at the disposal of humankind, but the extra food did not translate into a better diet or more leisure. Rather, it translated into population explosions and pampered elites. The average farmer worked harder than the average forager, and got a worse diet in return. The Algriculture Revolution was history's biggest fraud.<br/>
Who was responsible? Neither kings, nor priests, nor merchants. The culprits were a handful of plant species, including wheat, rice and potatoes. These plants domesticted Homo sapiens, rather than vice versa.

>This is the essence of the Agricultural Revolution: the ability to keep more people alive under worse conditions.

>Sadly not. Back in the snail-mail era, people usually only wrote letters when they have something important to relate. Rather than writing the first thing that came into their heads, they considered carefully what they wanted to say and how to phrase it. They expected to receive a similarly considered answer. Most people wrote and received no more than a handful of letters a month and seldom felt compelled to reply immediately. Today I receive dozens of emails each day, all from people who expect a prompt reply. We thought we were saving time; instead we revved up the treadmill of life to ten times its former speed and made our days more anxious and agitated.

>A modern calf in an industrial meat farm. Immediately after birth the calf is separated from its mother and locked inside a tiny cage not much bigger than a calf's own body. There the calf spends its entire life - about four months on average. It never leaves its cage, nor is it allowed to play with other calves or even walk - all so that its muscles will not grow strong. Soft muscles mean a soft and juicy steak. The first time the calf has a chance to walk, stretch its muscles and touch other calves is on its way to the slaughterhouse. In evolutionary terms, cattles represent one of the most successful animal species ever to exist. At the same time, they are some of the most miserable animals on the planet.

>According to the science of biology, people were not 'created'. They have involved. And they certainly did not evolve to be 'equal'. The idea of equality is inextricably intertwined with the idea of creation. The Americans got the idea of equality from Christianity, which argues that every person has a divinely created soul, and that all souls are equal before God. However, if we do not believe in the Christian myths about God, creation and souls, what does it mean that all people are 'equal'? Evolution is based on difference, not on equality. Every person carries a somewhat different genetic code, and is exposed from birth to different environmental influences. This leads to the development of different qualities that carry with them different chances of survival. 'Created equal' should therefore be translated into 'evolved differently'.

>Romanticism tells us that in order to make the most of our human potential we must have as many different experiences as we can. We must open ourselves to a wide spectrum of emotions; we must sample various kinds of relationships; we must try different cusines; we must learn to appreciate different styles of music. One of the best ways to do all that is to break free from our daily routine, leave behind our familiar setting, and go travelling in distant lands, where we can we can 'experience' the culture, the smells, the tastes and the norms of other people. We hear again and again the romantic myths about 'how a new experience opened my eyes and changed my life'.<br/>
Consumerism tells us that in order to be happy we must consume as many products and services as possible. If we feel that something is missing or not quite right, then we probably need to buy a product (a car, new clothes, organic food) or a service (housekeeping, relationship therapy, yoga classes). Every television commercial is another little legend about how consuming some product or service will make life better.

>For thousands of years, philosophers, thinkers, and prophets have besmirched money and called it the root of all evil.  Be that as it may, money is also the apogee of human tolerance. Money is more open-minded than language, state laws, cultural codes, religious beliefs and social habits. Money is the only trust system created by humans that can bridge almost any cultural gap, and that does not discriminate on the basis of religion, gender, race, age or sexual orientation. Thanks to money, even people who don't know each other and don't trust each other can nevertheless cooperate effectively.

>The first principle of monotheist religions is 'God exists. What does He want from me?' The first principle of Buddhism is 'Suffering exists. How do I escape it?'

>Level two chaos is chaos that reacts to predictions about it, and therefore can never be predicted acurrately. Markets, for example, are a level two chaotic system. What will happen if we develop a computer program that forecasts with 100 per cent accuracy the price of oil tomorrow? The price of oil will immediately react to the forecast, which would consequently fail to materialise. If the current price of oil is $90 a barrel, and the infallible computer program predicts that tomorrow it will be $100, traders will rush to buy oil so that they can profit from the predicted price rise. As a result, the price was shoot up to $100 a barrel today rather than tomorrow. Then what will happen tomorrow? Nobody knows.

>According to this approach, cultures are not conspiracies concocted by some people in order to take advantage of others (as Marxists tend to think). Rather, cultures are mental parasites that emerge accidentally and thereafter take advantage of all people infected by them.

>But the single most remarkable and defining moment of the past 500 years came at 05:29:45 on 16 July 1945. At that precise second, American scientists detonated the first atomic bomb at Alamogordo, New Mexico. From that point onward, humankind had the capability not only to change the course of history, but to end it.

>The Scientific Revolution has not been a revolution of knowledge. It has been above all a revolution of ignorance. The great discovery that launched the Scientific Revolution was the discovery that humans do not know the answers to the most important questions.

>Of all mankind ostensibly insoluble problems, one has remained the most vexing, interesting and important: the problem of death itself. Before the late modern era, most religions and ideologies took it for granted that death was our inevitable fate. Moreover, most faiths turned death into the main source of meaning in life. Try to imagine Islam, Christianity or the ancient Egyptian religion in a world without death. These creeds taught people that they must come to terms with death and pin their hopes on the afterlife, rather than seek to overcome death and live forever here on earth. The best minds were busy giving meaning to death, not trying to escape it.

>Even if we wanted to finance pure sicence unaffected by political, economic or religious interests, it would probably be impossible. Our resources are limited, after all. Ask a congressman to allocate an additional million dollars to the National Science Foundation for basic research, and he'll justifiably ask whether that money wouldn't be better used to fund teacher training or to give a needed tax break to a troubled factory in his district. To channel limited resources we must answer questions such as 'What is more important?' and 'What is good?' And these are not scientific questions. Science can explain what exists in the world, how things work, and what might be in the future. By definition, it has no pretensions to knowing what should be in the future. Only religions and ideologies seek to answer such questions.

>Yet Smith's claim that the selfish human urge to increase private profits is the basis for collective wealth is one of the most revolutionary ideas in human history - revolutionary not just from an economic perspective, but even more so from a moral and political perspective. What Smith says is, in fact, that greed is good, and that by becoming richer I benefit everybody, not just myself. Egoism is altruism.

>But in its extreme form, belief in the free market is as naive as believe in Santa Claus. There simply is no such thing as a market free of all political bias. The most important economic resources is trust in the future, and this resource is constantly threatened by thieves and charlatans. Markets by themselves offer no protection against fraud, theft and violence. It is the job of political systems to ensure trust by legislating sanctions against cheats and to establish and support police forces, courts and jails which will enforce the law. When kings fail to do their jobs and regulate the markets properly, it leads to loss of trust, dwindling credit and economic depression. That was the lesson taught by the Mississippi bubble of 1719, and anyone who forgot it was reminded by the US housing bubble of 2007, and the ensuing credit crunch and recession.

>Today, the earth's continents are home to almost 7 billion Sapiens. If you took all these people and put them on a large set of scales, their combined mass would be about 300 million tones. If you then took all our domesticated farmyard animals - cows, pigs, sheep and chickens - and placed them on an even larger set of scales, their mass would amount to about 700 million tones. In contrast, the combined mass of all surviving large wild animals - from porcupines and penguins to elephants and whales - is less than 100 million tones. Our children's books, our iconography and our TV screens are still full of giraffes, wolves and chimpanzees, but the real world has very few of them left. There are about 80,000 giraffes in the world, compared to 1.5 billion cattle; only 200,000 wolves, compared to 400 million domesticated dogs; only 250,000 chimpanzees - in contrast to billions of humans. Humankind really has taken over the world.

>During the Second World War, BBC News was broadcast to Nazi-occupied Europe. Each news programme opened with a live broadcast of Big Ben tolling the hour - the magical sound of freedom. Ingenious German physicists found a way to determine the weather conditions in London based on tiny differences in the tone of the broadcast ding-dongs. This information offered invaluable help to the Lufwaffe. When the British Secret Service discovered this, they replaced the live broadcast with a set recording of the famous clock.

>Previously bride and groom met in the family living room, and money passed from the hands of one father to another. Today courting is done at bars and cafés, and money passes from the hands of lovers to waitresses. Even more money is transferred to the bank accounts of fashion designers, gym managers, dietitians, cosmeticians and plastic surgeons, who help us arrive at the café looking as similiar as possible to the market's ideal of beauty.

>Nothing captures the biological argument better than the famous New Age slogan: 'Happiness begins within.' Money, social status, plastic surgery, beautiful houses, powerful position - none of these will bring you happiness. Lasting happiness comes only from serotonin, dopamine and oxytocin.

>Buddha agreed with modern biology and New Age movements that happiness is independent of external conditions. Yet his more important and far more profound insight was that true happiness is also independent of our inner feelings. Indeed, the more significance we give our feelings, the more we crave them, and the more we suffer. Buddha's recommendation was to stop not only the pursuit of external achievements, but also the pursuit of inner feelings.

中文译本书名取其副标题，为《人类简史》。这是一本堪称经典的教科书级别的书籍，书中并不仅仅是讲述人类的历史，而是以历史为主线，讲述了人类的发源和壮大，乃至衍生出特有的经济、政治和文化的史诗。同时这本书也是一本思想著作，是人类学、社会学、经济学、生物学等多学科最新研究成果的全面综述。笔法生动有趣，又令人深思，读完着实有一种做完一场酣畅淋漓的智力体操的感觉。

读完这本书，对于我的认知是一次更大的串联和提升。串联的地方，比如说提到人类之所以崛起，依靠的是对于共同想象的神话（myth）的认同，从而实现大规模和灵活的协作。延申到超过150人（很明显这个数字来自于邓巴定律，本书中并没有直接提及）规模的公司管理，同样也需要共同的神话（common myths）。提升的地方，比如说书中提到等级制度和人人平等的观念都是一种myth，这就让我拍案叫绝而后又陷入沉思。

我们都知道，人类（在这本书中，更确切的说应该是智人）开始农耕社会以前，就已经掌握了对于火的使用，我们想象的场景往往是一群原始人围着一堆篝火取暖和烤炙食物。而这本书中提到另一个可能性，就是为了获取熟食，人类直接点燃整座森林，等火熄灭之后再去寻找烤熟的动植物。想想难免有点唏嘘，现代人类对于能量的运用比起当时已经有了难以想象的提升，但是我们是否也会做类似的事情，比如说使用核武器烧毁更大范围的森林，或者更可能是敌对的国家？后来人类进入了农耕社会，看似是社会发展的巨大飞跃，作者却认为是小麦等农作物对于人类的驯化。人类的身体并不是进化用来做农耕活动的，而此后人类开始了人口爆炸而生活水平普遍降低的苦难生活。

去年有读过一本书《文明的冲突与世界秩序的重建》，这本书中从文明划分的角度来阐述了国家和地区间的冲突。而《Sapiens》这本书中提到，这样的说法只是解释世界现状的一种观点而已。对于我来说，是世界观的又一次扩展。读完这本书，最大的收获就是再一次深刻地体会到（也是这本书中有提到的）：很多我们习以为常的东西并不是常态，而是人类历史上新近出现的。

所以说，读书可以医愚，或者说是增进智慧，对我来说是正确的。

诸君共勉之。